español.md, before:

# Pronunciation/Sentence Structure (a little)

# Verbs

## Sources-resources
Oh hey look at [this silly](https://www.spanish.academy/blog/master-the-18-spanish-tenses-and-take-our-cheat-sheet-with-you/).

## Present
Used for english simple present and continuous present (i do and i am doing)

### Normal verbs

|             | Singular | Plural    |
|-------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -o       | -amos/emos|
| Tu/Vosotros | -as/es   | -ais/eis  |
| 3rd         | -a/e     | -an/en    |

### Weird and cringe verbs

[this thing](https://www.cliffsnotes.com/study-guides/spanish/spanish-ii/the-present-tense-indicative/yo-irregulars) has yo-irregulars

Some verbs: querer, llorar, hablar, comer, estar, tener, conocer

### Ramblings
Yo te quiero <33333, quieresme? No me quieres? :((( Lloro. Hablamos espanol, pero lo non es bien. Tengo muy hambre, quiero comer. Estoy abburido porque el presente es muy facil. No qUiErO grIdAr Tu NoMbRe. Quiemo la escuela 😈 quiero incendio provocado. Conozco tu madre (😈). Non ven que veo. Me dices algo y no te escucho jejeje. Jejeje es una manera interessante de reir, me gusta mas heehee. Uhm amo la carne humana - duolingo

## Preterite
Used for simple past. IMPORTANT THIS IS **NOT** THE IMPERFECT TENSE. THERE IS A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN i did {x} AND i was doing {x} OR i used to do {x}. 

### Normal verbs
Beware, for the nosotros form is the same in present and preterite for -ar verbs. Scary I know.

|             | Singular  | Plural        |
|-------------|-----------|---------------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -é/í      | -amos/imos    |
| Tu/Vosotros | -aste/iste| -asteis/isteis|
| 3rd         | -ó/io     | -aron/ieron   |

### Weird and cringe verbs (but even worse than present tense)
As much as I wish I could say the preterite is regular, ser and ir have THE **EXACT SAME CONJUGATION** FOR [SOME REASON (1)](https://github.com/ablativusinstrumentis/languages-in-markdown/blob/main/espa%C3%B1ol.md#silly-goofy-language-notes-for-those-interested-literally-just-me-im-interested). Most of the irregulars kind of half-remember that "oh i used to be a latin verb once right" and add a v EVEN THOUGH THE V IS USED IN PAST PERFECT AND NOT SIMPLE PAST but ok fine.

[these guys](https://www.cliffsnotes.com/study-guides/spanish/spanish-i/the-preterite-tense/irregulars-in-the-preterite-tense) again have irregulars which is nice.

Some verbs: dar, pasar, a/parecer, poner, creer, poder, pensar, sentir, trabajar, buscar (wow so many verbs)

### Ramblings
Yo te di todo (y me diste nada lmaoo) (fuiste un nerd). *Pareciste* como un nerd, pero *apareciste* en frente de mi. Pense que parecer y aparecer fueron lo mismo, pero no. Mi senti como un idioto. QUE PASO MIENTRAS NON FUI AQUI. (o que mierda paso) Creo que me intereso. Busce y busce y non encontre. Ayer yo trabaje para 16 HORAS. 

## Imperfect
This **IS** THE IMPERFECT TENSE. The difference is approximately "was doing" vs "did". Used for habitual/continuous actions "used to do this", actions in the past slightly before another past action "was doing this when happened", time and dates and stuff "was 3:00" (era 3 horas idk), past descriptions "was tired" (estaba cansado). Only 3 irregular verbs, ir is pretty intuitive (for once), ser is just italian era, ver is *ve + ending*. Easy woo!!

|             | Singular  | Plural       |
|-------------|-----------|--------------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -aba/ía   | -abamos/iamos|
| Tu/Vosotros | -abas/ias | -abais/iais  |
| 3rd         | -aba/ia   | -aban/ian    |

Some verbs:

### Ramblings


## Future
Used for "going to do" and "will do" (informal and formal)

### Informal "going to do"
*ir (present) + a + infinitive*, same construction as English, used for immediate future

|Ir conjugation| Singular | Plural    |
|--------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros  | voy      | vamos     |
| Tu/Vosotros  | vas      | vais      |
| 3rd          | va       | van       |

Example: Voy a comer "i am going to eat", quiero ir a comer "i want to go eat"

### Formal "will do"
*infinitive + ending*, mostly regular, some verbs change root form but overall normal.

|             | Singular | Plural    |
|-------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -é       | -emos     |
| Tu/Vosotros | -ás      | -éis      |
| 3rd         | -á       | 	-án      |

Some verbs: tener, poder, llegar (to arrive)

### Ramblings
Voy a quemar la escuela. O no. No, quemaré la escuela. Quieres ir a comer conmigo? Si tu non vas conmigo, lloraras. (check this construction it probably needs conditional) Tendre muy hambre en x horas. Cuando llegaras? Podre ir a comer conmigo per favor quiero comer estoy dying de hambre. ay Dios mio ?cuando dejas de? Les gustara (muahaha o es muajaja o muajeje aaaa)


# Silly Tumblr Posts I Really Like
[disapproval-decepcionar](https://www.tumblr.com/tagged/spanish%20vocab)


# Silly goofy language notes for those interested (literally just me, im interested)
Please excuse the fact that these arent in fact footnotes, I know how to do footnotes I just dont like the way they look in this case. ALSO THESE ARENT SUPPOSED TO BE FOOTNOTES.

1: It was vulgar latin. Of course it was vulgar latin. [Here](http://spanishlinguist.us/2017/02/why-ser-and-ir-are-so-irregular/) [are](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ir#Spanish) [some](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ser#Spanish) [silly](https://qr.ae/psPVuu) [semi-related links](https://forum.wordreference.com/threads/ser-ir-preterite.512174/post-2902468) that dont reaaaaally answer the question but also i couldnt find anything better.

Commit message:

Update conditional (needs further work)

español.md, after:

# Pronunciation/Sentence Structure (a little)

# Verbs

## Sources-resources
Oh hey look at [this silly](https://www.spanish.academy/blog/master-the-18-spanish-tenses-and-take-our-cheat-sheet-with-you/).

## Present
Used for english simple present and continuous present (i do and i am doing)

### Normal verbs

|             | Singular | Plural    |
|-------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -o       | -amos/emos|
| Tu/Vosotros | -as/es   | -ais/eis  |
| 3rd         | -a/e     | -an/en    |

### Weird and cringe verbs

[this thing](https://www.cliffsnotes.com/study-guides/spanish/spanish-ii/the-present-tense-indicative/yo-irregulars) has yo-irregulars

Some verbs: querer, llorar, hablar, comer, estar, tener, conocer

### Ramblings
Yo te quiero <33333, quieresme? No me quieres? :((( Lloro. Hablamos espanol, pero lo non es bien. Tengo muy hambre, quiero comer. Estoy abburido porque el presente es muy facil. No qUiErO grIdAr Tu NoMbRe. Quiemo la escuela 😈 quiero incendio provocado. Conozco tu madre (😈). Non ven que veo. Me dices algo y no te escucho jejeje. Jejeje es una manera interessante de reir, me gusta mas heehee. Uhm amo la carne humana - duolingo

## Preterite
Used for simple past. IMPORTANT THIS IS **NOT** THE IMPERFECT TENSE. THERE IS A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN i did {x} AND i was doing {x} OR i used to do {x}. 

### Normal verbs
Beware, for the nosotros form is the same in present and preterite for -ar verbs. Scary I know.

|             | Singular  | Plural        |
|-------------|-----------|---------------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -é/í      | -amos/imos    |
| Tu/Vosotros | -aste/iste| -asteis/isteis|
| 3rd         | -ó/io     | -aron/ieron   |

### Weird and cringe verbs (but even worse than present tense)
As much as I wish I could say the preterite is regular, ser and ir have THE **EXACT SAME CONJUGATION** FOR [SOME REASON (1)](https://github.com/ablativusinstrumentis/languages-in-markdown/blob/main/espa%C3%B1ol.md#silly-goofy-language-notes-for-those-interested-literally-just-me-im-interested). Most of the irregulars kind of half-remember that "oh i used to be a latin verb once right" and add a v EVEN THOUGH THE V IS USED IN PAST PERFECT AND NOT SIMPLE PAST but ok fine.

[these guys](https://www.cliffsnotes.com/study-guides/spanish/spanish-i/the-preterite-tense/irregulars-in-the-preterite-tense) again have irregulars which is nice.

Some verbs: dar, pasar, a/parecer, poner, creer, poder, pensar, sentir, trabajar, buscar (wow so many verbs)

### Ramblings
Yo te di todo (y me diste nada lmaoo) (fuiste un nerd). *Pareciste* como un nerd, pero *apareciste* en frente de mi. Pense que parecer y aparecer fueron lo mismo, pero no. Mi senti como un idioto. QUE PASO MIENTRAS NON FUI AQUI. (o que mierda paso) Creo que me intereso. Busce y busce y non encontre. Ayer yo trabaje para 16 HORAS. 

## Imperfect
This **IS** THE IMPERFECT TENSE. The difference is approximately "was doing" vs "did". Used for habitual/continuous actions "used to do this", actions in the past slightly before another past action "was doing this when happened", time and dates and stuff "was 3:00" (era 3 horas idk), past descriptions "was tired" (estaba cansado). Only 3 irregular verbs, ir is pretty intuitive (for once), ser is just italian era, ver is *ve + ending*. Easy woo!!

|             | Singular  | Plural       |
|-------------|-----------|--------------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -aba/ía   | -abamos/iamos|
| Tu/Vosotros | -abas/ias | -abais/iais  |
| 3rd         | -aba/ia   | -aban/ian    |

Some verbs:

### Ramblings


## Future
Used for "going to do" and "will do" (informal and formal)

### Informal "going to do"
*ir (present) + a + infinitive*, same construction as English, used for immediate future

|Ir conjugation| Singular | Plural    |
|--------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros  | voy      | vamos     |
| Tu/Vosotros  | vas      | vais      |
| 3rd          | va       | van       |

Example: Voy a comer "i am going to eat", quiero ir a comer "i want to go eat"

### Formal "will do"
*infinitive + ending*, mostly regular, some verbs change root form but overall normal.

|             | Singular | Plural    |
|-------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -é       | -emos     |
| Tu/Vosotros | -ás      | -éis      |
| 3rd         | -á       | 	-án      |

Some verbs: tener, poder, llegar (to arrive)

### Ramblings
Voy a quemar la escuela. O no. No, quemaré la escuela. Quieres ir a comer conmigo? Si tu non vas conmigo, lloraras. (check this construction it probably needs conditional) Tendre muy hambre en x horas. Cuando llegaras? Podre ir a comer conmigo per favor quiero comer estoy dying de hambre. ay Dios mio ?cuando dejas de? Les gustara (muahaha o es muajaja o muajeje aaaa)

## Conditional
A lot of use cases!!! Very good tense 10/10

### Uses!!!!!! So many
- Would do in the future if you could
- Something that probably wont happen (but if only) (like italian quando circa impossibile ma voglio)
#### Specific Cases
- English "would {verb}" is just the conditional of that verb. So nice!
- English "could {verb infinitive}" is the conditional of poder.
- English "should" is deber.

*infinitive + ending*, mostly regular, some verbs change root form but overall normal.

|             | Singular | Plural    |
|-------------|----------|-----------|
| Yo/Nosotros | -ia      | -iamos    |
| Tu/Vosotros | -ias     | -iais     |
| 3rd         | -ia      | 	-ian     |

# Silly Tumblr Posts I Really Like
[disapproval-decepcionar](https://www.tumblr.com/tagged/spanish%20vocab)


# Silly goofy language notes for those interested (literally just me, im interested)
Please excuse the fact that these arent in fact footnotes, I know how to do footnotes I just dont like the way they look in this case. ALSO THESE ARENT SUPPOSED TO BE FOOTNOTES.

1: It was vulgar latin. Of course it was vulgar latin. [Here](http://spanishlinguist.us/2017/02/why-ser-and-ir-are-so-irregular/) [are](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ir#Spanish) [some](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ser#Spanish) [silly](https://qr.ae/psPVuu) [semi-related links](https://forum.wordreference.com/threads/ser-ir-preterite.512174/post-2902468) that dont reaaaaally answer the question but also i couldnt find anything better.
